Add native support for networks represented by the SONATA format (#2595)
nest/nest-simulator: doc/htmldoc/nest_sonata/nest_sonata_guide.rst

.. _nest_sonata:

NEST SONATA guide 
=====================

NEST supports building and simulating networks of point neurons described by the SONATA format [1]_. 
This guide provides the details about how a SONATA network must be specified to be supported natively by NEST. 

.. _sec:sonata_overview:

Overview of the SONATA format 
-----------------------------

> The SONATA (Scalable Open Network Architecture TemplAte) format provides a framework for storage and exchange of 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SONATA (Scalable Open Network Architecture Template) format provides a framework for storage and exchange of 
```

Author: Since SONATA is derived from **S**calable **O**pen **N**etwork **A**rchitecture **T**empl**A**te I think it makes sense to keep it as is. This is also in line with the spelling in the SONATA paper and documentation.

Reviewer: Ah, sorry you're right :)

network models and simulation configurations. A network is considered as a graph made of nodes and edges. Nodes of a 
network can be arranged into multiple populations. There are two categories of nodes: explicitly simulated nodes 
(neurons) and virtual nodes (devices) that only provide inputs to the simulated system. Nodes within and between 
populations are connected through edges (synapses). The SONATA format explicitly tabulates information about nodes 
and edges in the table-based file formats HDF5 and CSV. 

The cell and synapse properties of the nodes and edges, respectively, can be described either individually or for 
whole subsets. Nodes that share a global set of properties constitute a node type. Similarly, a subset of edges 
that share a global set of properties constitute an edge type. Whether a property is stored individually or on a 

> per-type basis is up to the modeller. The number of node or edge types in a network model is typically small compared 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
per-type basis is up to the modeler. The number of node or edge types in a network model is typically small compared 
```

to the number of nodes or edges. Therefore, the node and edge type files are stored in the CSV format such that a 
particular node or edge type can be easily accessed by its node or edge type id.

Each node and edge in the network is explicitly tabulated in the binary format HDF5. Populations are hierarchically

> organized by utilizing HDF5 groups and datasets. The SONATA format requires certain HDF5 datasets, for instance 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
organized by utilizing HDF5 groups and datasets. The SONATA format requires certain HDF5 datasets, for instance, 
```

a dataset containing all the node type ids. Properties that are 

> stored on an individual-basis, for instance synaptic weights, are also stored in HDF5 datasets. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
stored on an individual basis, for instance, synaptic weights, are also stored in HDF5 datasets. 
```

Simulation parameters and the locations of the HDF5 and CSV files specifying the network are stored in JSON 
configuration files. 

.. _sec:sonata_nodes:

> The NEST support of SONATA nodes 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NEST support of SONATA nodes 
```

> --------------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
----------------------------
```

> In the SONATA format, node populations are serialized in nodes HDF5 files and have a single associated node types 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the SONATA format, node populations are serialized in node HDF5 files and have a single associated node type 
```

> CSV file that assigns properties to all nodes with a given node type id. A node types CSV file may be shared by 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CSV file that assigns properties to all nodes with a given node type id. A node type CSV file may be shared by 
```

multiple node population HDF5 files.

> NEST assumes the following structure of the nodes HDF5 files: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NEST assumes the following structure of the node HDF5 files: 
```

:: 

    <nodes_file.h5>                     Filename
    ├─ nodes                            Group - required
    │  ├─ <population_name>             Group - required - usually only one but can be more population groups per file
    │  │  ├─ node_type_id               Dataset {N_total_nodes} - required

> **Note:** NEST assumes that the implicit row numbers in the ``node_type_id`` dataset correspond to the ``node_id``\s. 

Reviewer: Use the Restructuctured format for notes:

```
.. note::

   NEST assumes . . .
```

NEST supports the following SONATA node ``model_type``\s:

* ``point_neuron``
* ``point_process``
* ``virtual`` 

Both ``point_neuron`` and ``point_process`` mean that the node is a neuron model (explicitly simulated) whereas ``virtual`` 

> means that the node only provide inputs to the simulated system. ``virtual`` nodes are modelled as ``spike_generator``\s 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
means that the node only provide inputs to the simulated system. ``virtual`` nodes are modeled as ``spike_generator``\s 
```

> (see :doc:`../models/spike_generator`\). NEST requires that only one ``model_type`` is present per node types CSV file. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(see :doc:`../models/spike_generator`\). NEST requires that only one ``model_type`` is present per node type CSV file. 
```

> The required headers for node types CSV files that describe neuron models are: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The required headers for node type CSV files that describe neuron models are: 
```

* ``node_type_id``
* ``model_type``
* ``model_template``
* ``dynamics_params``

For a given ``node_type_id``, the ``model_template`` entry is the name of the NEST neuron model with prefix ``nest:``. NEST 
does not require the ``model_template`` entries to be the same, but the creation of the nodes described in a single node 

> types CSV file is faster if the neuron models are the same. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type CSV file is faster if the neuron models are the same. 
```

For a given ``node_type_id``, the ``dynamics_params`` entry is expected to be a reference to a JSON file that describes 
the parametrization of the neuron model. Below is an example of a JSON file describing the parametrization of a given 
node type: 

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "I_e": 0.0,
        "tau_m": 44.9,
        "C_m": 239.0,
        "t_ref": 3.0,
        "E_L": -78.0,
        "V_th": -43.0,
        "V_reset": -55.0
    }

> NEST does not support node properties stored on an individual-basis in HDF5 datasets. This restriction can be 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NEST does not support node properties stored on an individual basis in HDF5 datasets. This restriction can be 
```

circumvented by assigning a single node its own node type id. 

> Below is an example of a node types CSV file with the required headers for neuron nodes: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is an example of a node type CSV file with the required headers for neuron nodes: 
```

Reviewer: All of  these plural 'types' read awkwardly to me.  It seems like it should be singular descriptor.

Author: I tend to agree. I based the spelling on the SONATA documentation which use a plural descriptor, but see now that the SONATA paper use a singular.

+--------------+---------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| node_type_id | model_type    | model_template     | dynamics_params | 
+==============+===============+====================+=================+
| 1            | point_process | nest:iaf_psc_alpha | params_1.json   |
+--------------+---------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| 2            | point_process | nest:iaf_psc_alpha | params_2.json   |
+--------------+---------------+--------------------+-----------------+

> The only required CSV header for ``virtual`` nodes is ``model_type``. The ``spike_generator``\s spike-times arrays are expected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only required CSV header for ``virtual`` nodes is ``model_type``. The ``spike_generator``\s spike-time arrays are expected
```

to be provided in HDF5 datasets with the configuration details specified in the JSON configuration file.  

.. _sec:sonata_edges:

The NEST support of SONATA edges  
--------------------------------

> Analogous to nodes, edge populations are serialized in edges HDF5 files and have a single associated edge types 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Analogous to nodes, edge populations are serialized in edge HDF5 files and have a single associated edge types 
```

CSV file that assigns properties to all edges with a given edge type id.

> NEST assumes the following structure of the edges HDF5 files: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NEST assumes the following structure of the edge HDF5 files: 
```

    │  │  ├─ indices                    Group - optional - currently not utilized
    │  │  │  ├─ source_to_target        Group
    │  │  │  │  ├─ node_id_to_range     Dataset {N_source_nodes x 2}
    │  │  │  │  ├─ range_to_edge_id     Dataset {N_source_nodes x 2}
    │  │  │  ├─ target_to_source        Group
    │  │  │  │  ├─ node_id_to_range     Dataset {N_target_nodes x 2}
    │  │  │  │  ├─ range_to_edge_id     Dataset {N_target_nodes x 2}
    │  │  ├─ <edge_id1>                 Group - required 
    │  │  │  ├─ delay                   Dataset {M_edges} - optional
    │  │  │  ├─ syn_weight              Dataset {M_edges} - optional
    │  │  │  ├─ dynamics_params         Group - currently not supported
    │  │  ├─ <edge_id2>                 Group - optional - currently no support for more than one edge group
    │  │  │  ├─ delay                   Dataset {K_edges} - optional
    │  │  │  ├─ syn_weight              Dataset {K_edges} - optional
    │  │  │  ├─ dynamics_params         Group

Together the ``source_node_id`` and ``target_node_id`` datasets explicitly tabulate all individual connections. 

> The ``edge_type_id`` dataset attributes each edge its edge type id which is used to assign synaptic properties from the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``edge_type_id`` dataset attributes each edge its edge type id, which is used to assign synaptic properties from the 
```

edge types CSV file. 

In the SONATA format, edges within a population can be organized into one or more edge groups. Synaptic properties that 

> are specified on an individual-basis are stored in these edge groups. The groups are identified by an ``edge_id`` key. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are specified on an individual basis are stored in these edge groups. The groups are identified by an ``edge_id`` key. 
```

> NEST assumes the ``edge_id``\s are contiguous numeric keys starting from zero, i.e. 0, 1, 2, ... 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NEST assumes the ``edge_id``\s are contiguous numeric keys starting from zero, that is, 0, 1, 2, ... 
```

> **Note:** NEST currently only supports one edge group per edge population. Furthermore, NEST only reads the ``delay`` 

Reviewer: Use the Restructured Text format for notes

```
.. note::

     NEST currently  . . .

```

Author: Resolved by [3941e90](https://github.com/nest/nest-simulator/pull/2595/commits/3941e90f64518f2c102252ea7742b1bf5bd0bc6d).

and ``syn_weight`` datasets, given that they are provided. This means that only axonal delays and synaptic weights can 

> be stored on an individual-basis in the HDF5 format. Other synaptic properties must be given in the edge types 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be stored on an individual basis in the HDF5 format. Other synaptic properties must be given in the edge type 
```

CSV file(s). 

> Below is an example of a edge types CSV file: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is an example of a edge type CSV file: 
```

+--------------+----------------+-------+-----------------+
| edge_type_id | model_template | delay | dynamics_params | 
+==============+================+=======+=================+
| 1            | static_synapse | 2.0   | params_1.json   |
+--------------+----------------+-------+-----------------+
| 2            | static_synapse | 2.5   | params_2.json   |
+--------------+----------------+-------+-----------------+

> **Note:** Only the synaptic properties ``delay`` and ``syn_weight`` can be provided as headers in the edge types CSV file. 

Reviewer: Use restructured text format for notes (see above for example)

Other synaptic properties must be given in the JSON file under ``dynamics_params``. 

.. _sec:sonata_config:

The SONATA configuration files
------------------------------

> Model metadata, such as the relative location of the network files, and simulation parameters are stored in the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Model metadata, such as the relative location of the network files and simulation parameters, are stored in the 
```

SONATA configuration ("config") file(s) in the JSON format. Below is an example SONATA config with the components NEST 

> expects included:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
expects to be included:
```

        "$INPUT_DIR": "$BASE_DIR/inputs"
      },
      "components": {
        "point_neuron_models_dir": "$COMPONENTS_DIR/cell_models",
        "synaptic_models_dir": "$COMPONENTS_DIR/synaptic_models"
      },
      "networks": {
        "nodes": [
          {
            "nodes_file": "$NETWORK_DIR/internal_nodes.h5",
            "node_types_file": "$NETWORK_DIR/internal_node_types.csv"
          },
          {
            "nodes_file": "$NETWORK_DIR/external_nodes.h5",
            "node_types_file": "$NETWORK_DIR/external_node_types.csv"
          }
        ],
        "edges": [
          {
            "edges_file": "$NETWORK_DIR/internal_internal_edges.h5",
            "edge_types_file": "$NETWORK_DIR/internal_internal_edge_types.csv",
          },
          {
            "edges_file": "$NETWORK_DIR/external_internal_edges.h5",
            "edge_types_file": "$NETWORK_DIR/external_internal_edge_types.csv"
          }
        ]
      },
      "inputs": {
        "external_spike_trains": {
          "input_file": "$INPUT_DIR/external_spike_trains.h5",
          "node_set": "external"
        }
      },
      "run": {
        "tstop": 1500,
        "dt": 0.01
      }
    }

> **Note:** NEST supports the use of two config files, i.e. one network and one simulation config. NEST does not 

Reviewer: Use restructured text format for notes

stored on an individual basis, for instance, synaptic weights, are also stored in HDF5 datasets. 

Simulation parameters and the locations of the HDF5 and CSV files specifying the network are stored in JSON 
configuration files. 

.. _sec:sonata_nodes:

NEST support of SONATA nodes 
----------------------------

In the SONATA format, node populations are serialized in node HDF5 files and have a single associated node type 
CSV file that assigns properties to all nodes with a given node type id. A node type CSV file may be shared by 
multiple node population HDF5 files.

NEST assumes the following structure of the node HDF5 files: 

:: 

    <nodes_file.h5>                     Filename
    ├─ nodes                            Group - required
    │  ├─ <population_name>             Group - required - usually only one but can be more population groups per file
    │  │  ├─ node_type_id               Dataset {N_total_nodes} - required

.. note::

    NEST assumes that the implicit row numbers in the ``node_type_id`` dataset correspond to the ``node_id``\s. 

NEST supports the following SONATA node ``model_type``\s:

* ``point_neuron``
* ``point_process``
* ``virtual`` 

> Both ``point_neuron`` and ``point_process`` mean that the node is a neuron model (explicitly simulated) whereas ``virtual`` 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both ``point_neuron`` and ``point_process`` mean that the node is a neuron model (explicitly simulated; the two terms can be used interchangeably) whereas ``virtual`` 
```

.. _nest_sonata:

NEST SONATA guide 
=====================

> NEST supports building and simulating networks of point neurons described by the SONATA format [1]_. 

Reviewer 2: Could we put a direct link to the Sonata homepage in here?

This guide provides the details about how a SONATA network must be specified to be supported natively by NEST.

.. _sec:sonata_configure:

Configure NEST for SONATA
--------------------------

To use SONATA with NEST, both `HDF5 <https://hdfgroup.org/>`_ and `h5py <https://www.h5py.org/>`_ must be installed on
the system and NEST must be configured properly.

If you install NEST from a pre-built package, NEST will automatically be configured for SONATA support.

If you install NEST from source, the following configuration option must be added to
your CMake invocation:

.. code-block:: sh

    -Dwith-hdf5=ON

> For further details, see :doc:`../installation/cmake_options`.

Reviewer: This should be :ref:`cmake_options`

.. _nest_sonata:

NEST SONATA guide 

> =====================

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
=================
```

NEST supports building and simulating networks of point neurons described by the
`SONATA <https://github.com/AllenInstitute/sonata>`_ format [1]_. 
This guide provides the details about how a SONATA network must be specified to be supported natively by NEST.

.. _sec:sonata_configure:

Configure NEST for SONATA

> --------------------------

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-------------------------
```

whole subsets. Nodes that share a global set of properties constitute a node type. Similarly, a subset of edges 
that share a global set of properties constitute an edge type. Whether a property is stored individually or on a 
per-type basis is up to the modeler. The number of node or edge types in a network model is typically small compared 
to the number of nodes or edges. Therefore, the node and edge type files are stored in the CSV format such that a 
particular node or edge type can be easily accessed by its node or edge type id.

Each node and edge in the network is explicitly tabulated in the binary format HDF5. Populations are hierarchically
organized by utilizing HDF5 groups and datasets. The SONATA format requires certain HDF5 datasets, for instance, 
a dataset containing all the node type ids. Properties that are 
stored on an individual basis, for instance, synaptic weights, are also stored in HDF5 datasets. 

Simulation parameters and the locations of the HDF5 and CSV files specifying the network are stored in JSON 
configuration files. 

.. _sec:sonata_examples:

NEST SONATA Example

> --------------------

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-------------------
```

=====================

NEST supports building and simulating networks of point neurons described by the SONATA format [1]_. 
This guide provides the details about how a SONATA network must be specified to be supported natively by NEST.

.. _sec:sonata_configure:

Configure NEST for SONATA
--------------------------

To use SONATA with NEST, both `HDF5 <https://hdfgroup.org/>`_ and `h5py <https://www.h5py.org/>`_ must be installed on
the system and NEST must be configured properly.

In the installation of NEST, you need to add the following configuration option to
your CMake.

.. code-block:: sh

>     cmake -Dwith-hdf5=[ON </path/to/hdf5>]

Reviewer 2: - I find this line misleading since it looks like a complete cmake invocation, but isn't. I would rather write that you need to add the `-Dwith-hdf5=ON` option to the cmake invocation. @jessica-mitchell What do you think?
- Does `/path/to/hdf5` really work?

Reviewer: I agree, I think incomplete commands can be confusing.
